   MODIS Reprojection Tool Swath (MRTSwath) Release Notes
                       Version 2.2
                       November 2010

                  Land Processes DAAC
 USGS Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS) Center

Capabilities
------------

1. MODIS Data Products

The MODIS Reprojection Tool Swath (MRTSwath) allows the user to reproject
swath (DAAC and direct broadcast Level-1 and Level-2) MODIS data products.
Support for gridded land products has been implemented in the MODIS
Reprojection Tool (MRT).

2. Map Projections

The MODIS Reprojection Tool Swath allows the user to reproject to the
following map projections:

    * Albers Equal Area
    * Equirectangular
    * Geographic
    * Hammer
    * Integerized Sinusoidal
    * Interrupted Goode Homolosine
    * Lambert Azimuthal
    * Lambert Conformal Conic
    * Mercator
    * Mollweide
    * Polar Stereographic
    * Sinusoidal
    * Transverse Mercator
    * Universal Transverse Mercator

3. ISIN-Enhanced GCTP

As part of this software, the Generalized Cartographic Transformation
Package (GCTP) has been modified to incorporate the new Integerized
Sinusoidal Projection.

4. Spectral Subsetting

Any subset of the input HDF-EOS Scientific Data Sets (SDSs) may be selected
for reprojection. The default is to reproject all input SDSs. NOTE: The
MRTSwath will only process SDSs of the nominal MODIS scan size. If other
SDSs are specified, the MRTSwath will output an error message for that SDS,
but will continue on to process any other specified SDSs.

5. Spatial Subsetting

Two corners (upper left and lower right) of a rectangle in input/output
space may be specified. These corners may be given as coordinates in input
latitude and longitude, input line/sample pairs, or output projection
coordinates. If specifying line/sample pairs specify using a zero-based
coordinate system where the upper left corner is (0, 0). When specifying
input lat/long or input line/sample, the other two rectangle corners (upper
right and lower left) are computed automatically in input space. Then all
four corners are reprojected into output space, using the specified map
projection. Finally, a minimum-bounding rectangle is computed that contains
the four reprojected points, in output space. All points inside this
rectangle in output space are mapped back into input space for
reprojection. The default is to reproject the entire input image, using the
bounding rectangular coordinates from the global attributes metadata.

When specifying output projection coordinates, these coordinates must be
specified in the same units as is used for the projection (degrees for
geographic and meters for all other projections). The upper right and lower
left corners are computed from the specified upper left and lower right
corners to create a rectangle in output space. Using these coordinates in
output space, the corners are mapped back into input space to determine the
spatial subset corners in input space. The output image corner coordinates
should match the user-specified output spatial subset corners. If not
already, the lower right corner may need to be adjusted slightly so that it
is an integral number of lines and samples, based on the output pixel size.

6. Resampling

Resampling may be nearest neighbor, bilinear, or cubic convolution.

7. Datum Conversions

Datum conversions are not supported in the MRTSwath application.

8. Output Pixel Size

An output pixel size may be specified, one for each SDS. If only one pixel
size is specified, then it will be used for all SDSs. The default is to use
the same input and output pixel sizes for corresponding input and output
SDSs. For output to the Geographic projections, the pixel size must be
specified in decimal degrees. For output to all other projections, the
pixel size must be specified in meters.

9. Data Types

The MRTSwath supports character data and 8-bit and 16-bit integer data
(both signed and unsigned). If not specified, the default output data type
is the same as the input data type for each corresponding SDS.

10. File Formats

MODIS swath HDF-EOS files are supported on input. HDF-EOS, GeoTIFF, and raw
binary files are supported on output.

12. Platforms

The MODIS Reprojection Tool Swath is highly portable software. It currently
runs on four different platforms:

    * Windows
    * Linux-32
    * Linux-64
    * Macintosh

13. Interfaces

The MODIS Reprojection Tool Swath may be invoked from a powerful
command-line interface. A GUI version of MRTSwath is being developed and
will be available at a later date. The scriptable command-line interface,
with its variety of command-line options, is likely to be the method of
choice for reprojecting large numbers of files.


History
-------

Version 2.2 (November 2010)
-----------------------------

1. Windows version was compiled with Visual Studio Express 2008.  It no
   longer depends on Cygwin.

2. Due to conflicts with the MRTDATADIR environment variable with MRT
   and the HEG tool, MRTSwath now uses MRTSWATH_DATA_DIR as the default.  It
   will use MRTDATADIR if MRTSWATH_DATA_DIR is not defined, however.

3. MRTSwath can now be installed into and work with input and output data
   contained in directories with spaces.

4. There is a slight variation when rounding pixel values when writing integer
   output images in that negative values are now rounded to the next higher
   nagative value, i.e. -1.5 is rounded to -2.

5. Higher precision variables are now used in calculations to fix an issue 
   using nearest neighbor sampling which was setting some output pixels to the
   default fill value.

6. Added INT32 and UINT32 output file types.

7. A miscalculation during nearest neighbor resampling, which affected 
   categorical value output, was resolved so that no non-source values
   are written to MRTSwath output.


Version 2.1 (January 2006)
--------------------------
1. Modified the software to ignore '/'s in output SDS names when creating
   the output GeoTiff and RawBinary names.  The output GeoTiff and Raw Binary
   filenames are created by appending the SDSname to the base output filename.
   The '/' in the SDS name makes the software think there is a directory in
   the filename that doesn't exist.  For example, given a base filename of
   "MOD03out" and an SDS name of "Land/SeaMask", the output GeoTiff filename
   would be "MOD03out_Land/SeaMask".  The fix will ignore the '/' and the
   new output filename would be "MOD03out_LandSeaMask".

2. Fixed a bug in the software that prevented more than 32 SDSs from being
   processed in a file.  The software would often core dump on files with
   more than 32 SDSs (i.e. MOD03 files contain 39 SDSs).

3. Modified the software to read the _FillValue for the SDS and use that
   fill value in the output product. If no _FillValue is specified then 0.0
   will be used for the default fill value. NOTE: In some cases, the fill
   value is 65535 instead of 0 or a negative number. In these cases, the
   non-image data resulting from the projection (in addition to the fill
   values in the image) will be very bright instead of the dark pixels that
   most users are expecting.

4. Modified the resampling process so that if 50% or more of the pixels in
   the kernel are background fill, then the resulting output pixel will also
   be background fill. The background fill value used is the _FillValue
   tag associated with the SDSs. If no _FillValue is specified then 0.0 will
   be used for the default fill value.

5. Modified the routine which reads the bounding coordinates so that the
   bounding coordinates will be read even if they are not in the standard
   Struct, Core, and/or Archive metadata groups. The direct broadcast data
   commonly does not provide the full-blown metadata (i.e. Struct, Core, and
   Archive) groups that are available in the MODIS HDF products from the
   DAAC.

6. The previous release specified that the Geotiff files would have the UL
   corner refer to the center of the UL corner pixel. An incorrect Geotiff
   tag was used in this modification. RasterPixelIsArea actually refers to
   the UL corner of the pixel instead of the center of the pixel. This has
   been changed and we are now using RasterPixelIsPoint so that the center
   of the pixel is specified appropriately.

7. Modified the NN resampling kernel processing to use a post-processing
   pass to fill any holes left in the output image.  Previous versions of
   the software would produce NN output products with holes (single pixels
   with values of background fill) down the center of the image.


Version 2.0 (July 2004)
-----------------------
1. Added a Graphical User Interface in addition to the command-line MRTSwath
   executable.

2. Modified the parameter file parser to handle the Windows ^M characters
   at the end of a line.  Version 1.0 could not handle any ^M characters in
   the parameter file, which caused problems for users creating parameter
   files on the Windows platform.

3. Modified swath2grid executable to output all information and error messages
   to mrtswath.log in the local directory.

4. Modified swath2grid executable to no longer tag the WGS84 datum to all
   GeoTiff and Raw Binary output products.  Since the user is providing an
   ellipsoid and/or semi-major and semi-minor axes, it technically is incorrect
   to say that data set has a particular datum.  Datums have their own
   ellipsoid axes, which may be different from what the user specified.  If
   the use specifies WGS84 as the ellipsoid, then the WGS84 datum will be
   tagged since it has the same axes values as the WGS84 ellipsoid.

5. During testing of the GUI, a bug was found in the conversion of the
   UL and LR corners when using the LINE_SAMPLE option.  This problem has been
   fixed.

6. Modified the install script to not create .tcshrc, .cshrc, .bashrc, .login,
   or .bash_profile scripts if they don't already exist on the local system.
   If they do exist, then they are updated for the MRTSwath environment
   variables and to add the MRTSwath 'bin' directory to the PATH.

7. Fixed a bug that caused the software to core dump when projecting to the
   ISIN projection. The MRTSwath software used a value of 99 to represent
   the ISIN projection, however the GCTP software was expecting a value of
   31. The issue was fixed by modifying MRTSwath to use a value of 31 to
   represent the ISIN projection.

8. Added output for CHAR8 data types.

9. Fixed a bug that caused incorrect background fill values to be output
   when converting from one data type to another.

10. Added a shortcut icon for the MRTSwath and instructions for installation
    and setup in the User's Guide.

11. Added the MODIS sphere, radius of 6371007.181, to the list of spheres
    for output data. It will have a sphere code of 20.

12. If the user specifies a file extension of .hdf, .HDF, .tif, .TIF, .hdr,
    or .HDR for the output filename, that extension is now ignored. The
    output file format determines the extension of the output filename.
    Previous versions of MRTSwath would leave in the original extension and
    then add an additional extension, based on the output file format.

13. Previous versions of the MRTSwath output the GeoTiff UL corner point as
    the outer extent of the UL corner. This has been modified to represent
    the center of the pixel of the UL corner. In addition, the
    GTRasterTypeGeoKey GeoTiff tag has been modified to RasterPixelisArea to
    correctly represent that the corner point is the center of the pixel.
    The corner point representations for HDF-EOS and raw binary will remain
    the outer extent of the pixels.


Version 1.0
-----------
1. First public release.

2. Installation scripts provided.


Caveats
-------

1. MODIS gridded data (Level-2G, Level-3, and Level-4) is not supported.
   Only Level-1 and Level-2 swath HDF-EOS products are supported.

2. The output GeoTiff products follow the GeoTiff standard that has been
   in use at the USGS EROS. ENVI supports the output GeoTiff products from
   the MRTSwath, but we have been informed that other software does not
   always support ingesting our GeoTiff products.


Installation
------------

To obtain the MRTSwath software, download the appropriate installation
files for your specific platform from the USGS EROS LP DAAC MODIS Reprojection 
Tool web site (https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/lpdaac/tools). The download package
needs to be unzipped to extract a zip archive containing the MRTSwath software
with an installation script. In the Windows package, an executable file named 
unzip is also included.  For UNIX systems, unzip and zip are freeware packages 
available from GNU. For more information, or to obtain the zip/unzip software, 
see the GNU Web site at http://www.gnu.org/software/software.html. If using the 
automatic installation for Windows, only the download.zip should be unzipped. 
The installation script will handle the inflation of the MRTSwath_<platform>.zip.

Once the MRTSwath software has been downloaded, it needs to be installed on 
the user's host system. This can be done with either an automatic or manual
installation process. The automatic installation process is recommended for most 
users. Both methods require some pre-install checks.  First, be advised that 
entry of full pathnames during installation is highly recommended for all 
directories. Second, in order to run the MRTSwath GUI, a current version of 
Java  must be installed on the system (at least the Java 2 Runtime Environment 
version 1.5 or the Java 2 SDK version 1.5 or later). Third, the path to the Java 
directory is needed during the installation process, so have this information 
available during installation.  

Instructions for automatic and manual installation to UNIX-based (Linux-32, 
Linux-64, and Mactel) and Windows-based systems are detailed in the MRTSwath
User Manual available from the LP DAAC Tools download site.
